>> Kyle Simpson: I think one of the most
important answers to the why functional
programming is this
concept of provability.
What functional programming seeks
to do at least from my perspective,
what it seeks to do is to use patterns
that have already been tried and
tested and proven and
not for like two years.
You know how we get all excited.
Cuz two years ago,
somebody invented Reactor.
3.5 years ago, they invented Angular and
we're all hyperexcited about that.
In a year from now,
we're gonna be excited about Vue.
And then a year after that, we're gonna
be excited about whatever that thing
is that somebody in here is inventing.
Because we have this very small,
almost myopic view of innovation and
of the deep thought processes that
go into building this stuff that
we use the foundations that we walk upon.
These are ideas that have been around for
like 50 years or more.
As a matter of fact,
the mathematical principles underneath
them had have been around for hundreds
of years not a couple of years and
they don't just have a couple thousand
people starring the repo on GitHub.
We've got tens and hundreds of thousands
of mathematicians, and computer
scientists that have vetted these ideas,
and they've proven these ideas work.
And what they've said is here's
this crazy term monoid and
it describes this thing, which is
proven to do a thing you wanted to do.
So use it, so that your code in
that part has a proof to it.
Many of you probably know
that it's important to have tests around
your code and I certainly agree with that.
You should have unit tests.
You should have integration tests.
But there's a hint here that in a sense,
the aspiration should
be that we should write a piece
of code and know verifiably,
provably what it's gonna do without
even needing the unit test.
Like I already know the unit test is gonna
pass, cuz I used a mathematically proven
concept to model it and
you're not gonna argue with math.
If you get a bug and
the unit test doesn't pass,
it's cuz you didn't
implement it correctly.
So I think the functional programmer says,
let me try to use
mechanisms that are proven.
And you might wonder, okay,
is that just like an academic exercise?
Do you just make yourself feel clever,
because your code is more provable or
something like that.
There's something much deeper here.
Not only does provable code make it so
that you can understand that code better,
because I've said this before and
I'll say it a million more times.
Code that you do not stand is
code that you cannot trust and
the reverse is also true.
Code that you cannot trust is
code that you cannot understand.
If you cannot trust that it will
do exactly what you want it to do,
you don't fully understand it yet.
Let me ask you this way, how many of
you ever had a piece of code break and
you weren't sure why it broke?
Anybody?
We're all mostly raising our hands.
We're in good company.
Let me ask a more profound question,
how many of you have had a piece of code
work and you didn't know why it worked?
It's a little closer to the heart,
doesn't it?
So we have to admit that, but it's true.
We all do this and I include myself.
I wrote code a few days ago on the plane
ride here, I don't know how it works.
Literally, I don't know how it works.
I don't fully understand what I did.
So, code that you can't trust is code
that you can't fully understand.
In a functional program, it says,
one way to trust my code better is to
use a pattern that's already
been mathematically proven.
I don't need to go figure
that part out again.
I just need to understand it and then
understand how to put it together, and
then understand this other Lego piece and
how it fits in, and
what their effect together will do.
And I just build my program as
a series of those assertions.
Removing large swaths of the program
from the sphere of concern.
There are parts of your program that
you're always gonna have to wonder about,
your business logic,
your validation rules.
But there's also large swaths
of the program that represent
verifiable transformations on data that
you shouldn't have to worry about.
You should be able to fully trust it.
It should be provable and your own
intuition about how to prove stuff with
a unit test is not as good as the stuff
that's been proven by mathematicians for
hundreds of years, and
by computer scientists for decades.
It's just not.
So in a sense, I think a functional
programmer admits that.
Says, I need some help.
So, I'm gonna use this domain called
functional programming to find patterns
that I can use in my code that
have already been proven.
But there is something deeper and
this is I think the ultimate motivation,
the ultimate question.
Code that's already been proven and
code that's already recognizable as such.
Meaning, if you structure it in
such a way that it is easily at
a glance recognizable as
an implementation of that proven theory,
also means that,
that code does not have to take up
the neuron processing time in
you brain as you read the code.
What I really think the deepest
motivation for functional programming is,
it's not just to help you, the author
of the code have a confidence and
a level of provability and
trustability to what you've written.
But it is also to help the reader
of your code be able to trust that
they don't have to worry
about how these parts work.
They know what they do.
They know that you're using them.
There's a part of the code
I don't need to read and
I'll make the almost silly assertion.
The most readable code is the code
that doesn't have to be read at all,
because our brand should be focused
on the stuff that really matters.
The high-level, macro-level,
business logic,
validation rules kinds of stuff use
on our action rules, all of that.
That's what we should focus on,
but we get so
distracted by focusing
on all this other stuff.
And a function department says, why don't
we just do all that other stuff in our
provable trusted way, a recognizable way?
That way, the reader of the code doesn't
need to worry about that part anymore.
If they recognize it,
if they've learned what it does,
I don't need to think about it.
Imagine the mountain climber having
to think at every single moment.
Now, how does this carabiner work and
what is this rope doing?
I don't even know what rock climbing
equipment is, so I'm just pretending.
I've just Googled stuff.
Imagine him having,
while on the face of a mountain,
having to think about all those
individual little things.
Would that be an effective
way to climb a mountain?
I don't think so.
A mountain climber trusts his tools.
The mountain climber knows what the rope
does and knows what the carabiner does and
knows that if he falls,
it's gonna catch him.
>> Kyle Simpson: A functional program
are trust as tools.
Knows what it's gonna do.
Functional program are trusted
tools used by others.
And when they read their code, they don't
have to go second guess that stuff.
That helps code be more readable.
And ultimately,
the reason I think code readability is so
important is because the most important
thing that we can be doing as programmers
is communicating with other human beings.
That's not a unique thought to me,
but I believe it deeply.
Almost at a religious level
that our goal should be to better
communicate with other people.
The computer is already figuring
out from what you write,
whatever amazing code you
think you've architected.
The computer already looks at it and says,
thanks very much for that suggestion.
But I'm gonna do it in
an entirely different way.
Thanks very much.
Why do we get so
obsessed about what we write as if
the computer cares what we write?
Why don't we focus a little bit more and
a lot more on structuring the code,
so that other readers
including your future selves have an
easier time understanding what's going on.
That to me,
at least at this point in my journey,
I'm a little bit further up the cliff
face climbing than you are.
That to me is the why we're
climbing the mountain.
That's why functional programming.
Use mechanisms that have
been proven not only so
that you have a confidence over your
code and you understand it, but
that the reader of your code has
the same level of confidence and
understanding.
>> Kyle Simpson: So,
let me pause there for a moment.
Any thoughts or questions about
those assertions before I move on?
Yes.
>> Speaker 2: Just one question
from online.
Craig asked, when you move from
imperative to declarative, are you
increasing the level of abstraction?
>> Kyle Simpson: Abstraction is a funny
thing and we're gonna talk
more about abstraction, but
it's one of our fundamental.
It's one of our most important
concepts in programming.
And yet, I think a lot of people have
the wrong intuition about what abstraction
really is.
I bet if I were to poll each of you and
those of you online and I were to say,
tell me what,
if we were in a job interview and
I gave you the job interview question,
tell me what abstraction is.
Define abstraction.
Give me examples of abstraction.
I bet what I would hear from most of you
is something along the lines of well,
abstraction hides details.
Something to that effect.
We think about class-oriented coding or
hiding details inside of the class
implementation and
we call that an abstraction.
That's not really what abstraction is or
at least it's not what abstraction
was originally designed to describe.
That concept, hiding details in
particular has a different term and
that's called encapsulation.
Abstraction is a little different.
Abstraction actually comes
to us from a very old root.
If you think about the word complex,
that comes to us from the Latin root for
complect or complected and
that comes to us from this idea of
the strands of a rope being
tightly braided together.
And we know a rope that when it's
braided together, it's much stronger.
But we also know that if you have
a tightly braided strands of rope and then
you wanted to take just one of the strands
out, that would be virtually impossible.
So, complected comes to us from this idea
of having things tightly wound together.
And actually, we get simple as
the opposite of that where things
are completely separate and that's really
what abstraction was actually about.
It was not about taking some detail and
hiding it away, so
we don't have to think about it.
Rather, it was taking two or more
things that were tightly wound together
like the strands of a rope and
teasing them apart, separating them and
putting intentionally between
them a semantic boundary.
Not so that we don't have to think
about one or the other, but so
that we can comfortably sit on either
side of that semantic boundary.
Understand what that
thing is in its full and
completeness without worrying about the
stuff on the other side of the boundary.
Abstraction is about creating
semantic boundaries between things.
So in a sense, the question that was
asked is imperative to declarative.
Is that move towards declarative about
adding extra, extra, abstractions?
In its pure essence, yes.
But it's not about hiding things.
That's not what we wanna do.
It's about creating the appropriate
layers of separation.
The appropriate boundaries of separation,
so that we can independently think about,
reason about and prove each piece.
That's what it's really about.
We're gonna see many more
examples about this, so
I'm not gonna get any further into
that discussion of abstraction.
But I wanted to provide some
more color to that question.
In the basic sense, yes, it is.
But it's about adding
the right kind of abstraction.
There's lots of abstraction you can do.
There's lots of things you can do and
call them abstraction that aren't
going to aid us in that goal.